\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Copyright 2011 Google Inc.
@c All rights reserved.
@c
@c Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
@c modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
@c met:
@c
@c * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
@c   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@c * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
@c   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
@c   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@c * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors
@c   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
@c   without specific prior written permission.
@c
@c THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
@c "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
@c LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
@c A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
@c OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
@c SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
@c LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
@c DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
@c THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
@c (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
@c OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

@c %**start of header
@setfilename kyua-cli.info
@settitle Kyua testing framework (command-line tool)
@c %**end of header


@dircategory Kyua testing framework
@direntry
* Kyua: (kyua-cli). Command-line tool to execute and inspect tests.
@end direntry


@include version.texi
@include copying.texi


@titlepage
@title The Kyua testing framework
@subtitle Manual to the command-line tool
@author Julio Merino
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage


@contents


@ifnottex

@node Top
@top The Kyua testing framework

Kyua (pronounced Q.A.) is a testing framework focused both on
developers and on users.  Kyua is composed of several different
components among which are a command-line tool for interaction with
the runtime engine and a collection of libraries to aid in the
development of test cases.

This manual describes the operation of the command-line interface to
the Kyua testing framework and corresponds to the kyua-cli package,
version @value{VERSION}.

@end ifnottex


@menu
* Overview:: A general introduction.
* Troubleshooting:: Facilities and procedures to debug/report Kyua issues.

Developer's information
* Test interfaces:: Test program interfaces to the Kyua runtime engine.

Appendices and indices
* Copying:: License information.
* Index:: Table of concepts.
@end menu


@include overview.texi
@include test_interface.texi
@include troubleshooting.texi


@node Copying
@unnumbered Copying
@insertcopying


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp


@bye
