@c Copyright 2011 Google Inc.
@c All rights reserved.
@c
@c Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
@c modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
@c met:
@c
@c * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
@c   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@c * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
@c   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
@c   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@c * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors
@c   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
@c   without specific prior written permission.
@c
@c THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
@c "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
@c LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
@c A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
@c OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
@c SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
@c LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
@c DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
@c THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
@c (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
@c OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@cindex introduction
@cindex overview

Kyua (pronounced Q.A.) is a testing framework for both developers and
users.  Kyua is different from most other testing frameworks in that
it puts the end user experience before anything else.  There are
multiple reasons for users to run the tests themselves, and Kyua
ensures that they can do so in the most convenient way.

At the moment, Kyua is focused on implementing a solid foundation and
a powerful command-line tool to run tests implemented with the
Automated Testing Framework (ATF).  Later on, Kyua will also provide a
set of language bindings (C, C++ and shell, at the least) to ease the
implementation of test cases in a variety of programming languages,
and may also provide integration with test programs written with
third-party libraries.

@cindex atf

In effect, Kyua is intended to be a replacement for ATF.  The code
base of ATF is very hard to extend and the overall design of the tools
make it impossible to implement some features highly desired by users
-- e.g. parallel execution or historical test results data.
Additionally, the entry barrier for contributions to ATF is too high:
the whole project hosting for ATF uses tools that are not widespread
enough and that run on personal slow servers.  Kyua, at least for now,
uses popular solutions such as Subversion and hosting at Google Code
which should allow casual users and developers to contribute to the
project more easily.
